 

 


 


 


 

 

 

 

 

This book was made possible 

by 

George Hillman of Metlatonoc, Gœerrero 

 

 

English translation 

by 

Emily John-Martin 

 

 

Photographs are from aœthor 

and also from pœblic soœrces. 

 



 

 


 


 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

En las œ ltimas paginas se encontrara œn breve 
resœmen de co mo leer el mixteco. 

 

 

 

At the end of this book we have provided a brief 
sœmmary of how to read Mixtec. 

 

 



VE'E YATA „A IYOO „UU „A NANI MITLA „A 
NDIKAA CHI OAXACA 

 
Yo'o ke na ndatœ'œn yœ xi'in ndo xa'a ve'e yata kan 
ra kœndaa ini ndo. Ve'e kan ra chi nœœ kanata n œ'œ nœœ 
n œœ Mitla, ke iyoo n a. Ra kœa'a ni yœvi na kee inka xiyo 
xa'an n a xitondie'e na n a. Ra yachin nœœ iyoo ve'e kan ra 
kœa'a ni nœœ n a'a ixiko na, ixiko na ta kœœ tikoto1 n a 
kœnœ na, ta kœœ xatœ, xi'in koto, xi'in tikachi, xi'in mœrra 
n a yœ'va, xi'in kœa'a ni ka nœœ n a'a vali. Ra ve'e kan, ra 
na zapoteco va kœvi na xindee ini n a, kachi na. 

 

 

 


2 

 



1 tikoto kœ ni. kachi sa'ma 



 3 

 



THE RUINS IN THE TOWN OF MITLA IN THE 
STATE OF OAXACA 

 

 In this book I will tell yoœ aboœt an archeological2 
site so that yoœ will know all aboœt it. The archeological 
site is to the east, in a town called Mitla. There are many 
foreign visitors who go to see this place. It is right near 
the market where many people sell clothes that they 
weave, like pants, shirts, blankets, wall hangings, and all 
sorts of trinkets. The archeological site is commonly 
referred to as being from the Zapotec people. 

 


2 archeology is learning history by stœdying things people bœilt a long time ago 



 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


4 

 




 5 

 


 




Ra n a tœvi sava na ra sœ vi takœa na zapoteco kœvi 
na *ndixindee ve'e kan, chi *xindee tœ na savi3 va, saa chi 
iyoo tœ n a'a n a sanaana na kan va ndika ve'e kan. Ra n a 
tœvi sava na, ra n a *kindiaa va na savi kœœ ve'e kan nda'a 
na zapoteco, n a kan ke va'a sanaana na n a'a sata n a, tœvi 
na. Ndi sœ ndianii na kœnda a ini a ndixa a ndi xa, chi n a 
tœvi va na ke, ra ndi n a ka'an na ke xindee na zapoteco ra 
xindee tœ na savi va, kachi na. 

Ra yo'o ke na ndatœ'œn yœ xi'in ndo xa'a ve'e yata 
kan ra kœndaa ini ndo. Ve'e kan ra iin n a ndichi chi ni.nœ. 
n a kœ norte xiin ven œ'œ, ra inka n a ndichi chi ma'n œ ra 
ikan ke ndita si'in yœœ, ra xiin n a kan ndichi tœ ve'e nœœ 
iyoo yavi nœœ xindo'ni na ndii va. 

 

 


6 

 



3 na savi kœ ni. kachi na. yœvi ka 'a.n tœ.'œn nda 'vi 



 7 

 


 
However, it tœrns oœt that it wasnÕt jœst the 
Zapotec people who lived in this place, bœt Mixtec people 
as well, and there is archeological evidence to sœpport 
this. Some experts say that when we Mixtecs conqœered 
the Zapotecs, we took control of Mitla. It seems that it is 
likely, and we know for sœre that Mixtecs and Zapotecs 
both lived there, according to experts. 

 Now IÕd like to tell yoœ aboœt two different parts of 
the site. One groœp of bœildings is called the Chœrch 
Groœp, or North Groœp. The other groœp is called the 
Colœmns groœp, becaœse it has standing stones. To one 
side there are entrances to the tombs. 



Ve'e yata –a ’in chi ni.nu. –a kuu norte xiin ve–u'u 

Ve'e kan ra nina yœœ va ke kœva'a n a, ra kœmi kœœ 
tœtœn n a, ra chi ini va n a iyoo nœœ ke'e n a ra kœmi kœ tœ 
tœtœn nœœ ke'e va n a. Ra kœa'a va nœœ yœœ ke xinin œ'œ na 
n a xava'a na n a, saa chi xinin œ'œ na yœœ ko'ndo vali, ra 
saa tœ yœœ n a tœxi va na, ra ta iin yoso saa iin n a; ra 
xinin œ'œ tœ na yœœ n a na'nœ va'a n a kœ'va iin nda'a sava 
va. 

Ra ndœvi ni xava'a na n a, saa chi tian œ yœœ kan ra 
taan na yœœ vali n a ndana'a na kœœ ita, xi'in koo, xi'in 
ndila'la3, xi'in ndiakœa4, xi'in ko'ndo, ra sava tœ mii yœœ 
kan kaan na sata va n a sanaana na ita, xi'in kœa'a ni ka 
nœœ n a'a vali ndœvi. Ra itœn va kœvi nœ xindo'ni xini ve'e 
kan, ra ve'e n a xindee va na ke ndixiyo n a, kachi na. 

 

 


8 

 



4 ndila'la kœ ni. kachi ti.k— i.’ 5 ndiakœa ta ka n a. yo 'o Ñ ... 



 

 


10 

 




 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
11 

 




 

Ve'e nuu ndita si'in yuu 

 

 Nœœ i in ve'e nœœ ndita si'in yœœ kan, ra kœ'va œni 
nda'a vi ke sakœa'nœ na yœœ, ra ikan vi ke xava'a na ve'e 
kan. Ra chi nœœ iyoo ye'e n a ra xava'a na kœato n a ndaa 
yo. Ra ta xa na ki'vi yo ye'e kan ra mii kan ke ndita yœkœn 
in œ saa si'in yœœ chee n a na'nœ ni kan va, ra xika xika va 
ndita n a xi'in ta'an n a. Ra ta i in ndasa saa i in n a, ra kœ'va 
œvi nda'a ya'a vi kœvi n a, chi nœœ sœkœn n a, ra iin ta kœ'va 
ndœ'œ toko iin tœxa chee tœn ndœ'œ ni, saa vi ke ndœ'œ 
toko n a. 

Ra sœkœn ve'e kan chi ke'e nœœ iyoo ye'e nœœ 
ndiki'vi na, ra nina yœœ n a ndœvi n a ndana'a na kœœ ita 
vali va ke xava'a na n a, ra ndœvi ni n a. Ra ve'e kan, ra 
ve'e nœœ xindee na sœtœ, xi'in na rey va ke ndixiyo n a, 
kachi sava na. 

 


12 

 




 

The Columns Group 

 

In front of this bœilding are standing stones that 
are carved to be approximately 3 meters in height. At 
the front of the bœilding is a grand entrance with steps 
(see pictœre on page 5). It is impressive to enter the 
corridor8 and see the six colœmns, standing in a perfect 
line, each exactly spaced with geometrical precision9. 
The stones are set œp with aboœt 2 meters of space 
between them, they are qœite tall, and they are aboœt as 
big aroœnd as a fœlly grown pine tree. 

The bœilding is qœite tall and there are large 
passageways that lead to the patio, which is decorated 
entirely in beaœtifœl patterned stonework, with 
repeating shapes of flowers and other designs. This was 
the bœilding of the priests, as well as where the king 
lived, according to experts. 

 

 
13 

 



8 a corridor is like a hallway 9 mathematically perfect 



14 

 


 




 15 

 


 




Yavi nuu xindo'ni na ndii 

 
Ra yavi ndii, n a iyoo nœœ ke'e ve'e n a ndichi chi 
xi'in ve'e nœœ ndita si'in yœœ kan, ra ndichi ni va xava'a 
na n a, saa chi ini n œ'œ va xava'a na n a. Ra ye'e n a nœœ 
ki'vi yo ra ta iyoo yavi xitœn n a kœxitœn xini sindiki va 
saa iyoo n a, ra n a iyoo tœtœn va kœvi n a. Ra xava'a tœ na 
œxa kœato10 n a kœan œ yo nœœ va yo ini yavi kan, ra ta xa 
na ndœxinœ yo, saa ra ikan ndœndakœ va, ra iin vivi'i lo'o 
kœ'œn yo, saa ra ndachitœvi tœkœ va yo, ra saa vi ke xaa yo 
nœœ iyoo yavi kan. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


16 

 



10 kœato kœ ni. kachi steps 



The tombs 

 

 The tombs are located in the patio area of the main 
bœilding in the Colœmns Groœp. The architects11 who 
designed these bœildings were highly skilled and 
designed the tombs as œndergroœnd chambers. The 
entrances to the tombs are large rectangœlar pits. They 
were bœilt with seven steps going down into the actœal 
passageways. At the base of the steps is a short passage-
way to another set of steps leading œp and into the 
tombs. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
17 

 



Tomb Two. Mitla Archaeological Ruins Oaxaca Mexico Travel And Tour Pictures, Photos, Information, Images, & Reviews.
11 architects are experts in the math and art of designing bœildings 



18 

 


 


Ra yavi kan, ra ta kaa crœz va, saa kaa n a. Ra kœ'va 
œvi nda'a vi ke n a sœkœn n a, ra saa tœ chi nœœ ndika va n a, 
ra ndœ'œ iin n a'n œ yœœ n a tiœvi ini yavi kan, ra yœœ kan ke 
xindi'i xini na ndii, tœvi sava na. 



 19 

 


 


 The tombs themselves are in the shape of a cross. 
They are aboœt 2 meters high and aboœt the same in 
depth. There are stone slabs that appear to have been 
carved to be headrests for the deceased person. 



„a'a –a sanaana na savi 

 
Yo'o ke na ndatœ'œn xi'in ndo xa'a n a'a n a sanaana 
na savi ra kœndaa ini ndo. Na savi na xindee ve'e yata n a 
ndichi chi ni.nœ. n a kœœ norte, xiin ven œ'œ nœœ n œœ Mitla 
kan, ra ndichi ni va ndixiyo na, saa chi takœndi'i chin œ n a 
xa na, ra sanaana ndi'i va na n a ndika ve'e n a va'a na 
kœndaa ini inka yœvi xa'a n a, ra n a'a kan kœvi: ta kœœ n a 
ka'an xa'a na n a ndixiyo na, xi'in n a ka'an xa'a na ta 
nditanda'a na, xi'in n a ka'an xa'a n a ndixi'i ta'an na, xi'in 
n a ka'an xa'a na n a kanita'an na xi'in inka yœvi. 

 

 


20 

 



pos_pascualurcid01_02.jpg (440.294)

What the Mixtecs wrote 

 

In this chapter I'll explain to yoœ what we know 
aboœt the Mixtec kingdoms. The Mixtecs who were in 
the palace at Mitla were very skilled and well-edœcated, 
which we can see not only in the architectœre, bœt also in 
the fresco writings they made on many of the walls. 
They docœmented many historical events, especially the 
marriages and deaths of royalty and information aboœt 
battles foœght against other kingdoms. 

 
21 

 




22 

 



Ra n a'a n a sanaana na kœvi n a ka'an xa'a chin œ n a 
xa na, ra n a kan kœvi ta kœœ isœ, xi'in ndiva'yœ, xi'in kœiin, 
xi'in ndika'a, xi'in yœvi, xi'in inka nœœ n a'a. Ra takœndi'i 
na'na n a sanaana na kœvi n a ka'an xa'a n a *kœœ, ra ka'an 
n a ndia yoo ke *kœœ n a, ra ka'an tœ n a ndia kœiya ke *kœœ 
va n a, kachi na. 

N a yo'o ke *sanaana na savi na xindee ve'e yata n a 
iyoo chi n œœ Mitla, Oaxaca. Ra ndia salo'o va na'a n a saa 
chi xa kœa'a ni kœiya ke sanaana na n a, ra n a kan ke xa 
ndoo va iin n a'n œ n a, ra ndia siin n a'n œ va n a na'a vichin. 



 23 

 


 
The Mixtecs wrote aboœt how they did many 
things and they wrote œsing hieroglyphs in the forms of 
deer, coyotes, tigers, lions, hœmans, and many other 
classes of things. They were able to write aboœt 
anything and everything œsing hieroglyphs and are 
known for their calendars, writing aboœt the months and 
the years that varioœs historical events happened, 
according to experts. 

 

 This shows some of the hieroglyphs that Mixtecs 
painted on the walls of the palaces at Mitla, Oaxaca. This 
is only a small part of what were originally large fres-
coes. Today only a few pieces remain on some of the 
walls. 



 


24 

 




This book is aboœt the rœins of Mitla, Oaxaca, 
Mexico. 

The rœins of Mitla are divided in three 
groœps, which are: the groœp that is to the North, 
next to the chœrch, the colœmns groœp, and the 
tombs groœp. 

This book talks aboœt who constrœcted the 
rœins, aboœt the details of its architectœre, the 
designs, and Mixtec heiroglyphs. 

Many people visit these rœins each year and 
learn aboœt the history of the Zapotecs and the 
Mixtec Empire. Now yoœ can learn aboœt the rœins 
and the fascinating history of indigenoœs 
civilizations. 

 

 

 
25 

 




 27 

 


 
Not all Mixtec langœages are written in the 
same way. In the mœnicipality of Tiata'nœ, also 
called Metlatonoc, in Gœerrero, Mixtec is written 
differently. They donÕt mark the tone on most 
vowels. They also œse symbols that we donÕt œse. 
Look at the following examples. 


Ka'vi n a. 


^Ka'vi n a. 


*Ka'vi n a. 



28 

 



Ndakava ra. 


^Ndakava ra. 


*Ndakava ra. 


Tiaa ra. 


*Tiaa ra. 


^Tiaa ra. 



 31 

 



Now we will review how we write the tones 
that indicate the negative form. When we write 
the negative form, we œse the œmlaœt ( ¬ ) over the 
first vowel of the word. 

When we want to say that something is 
good or not good, we jœst change the tone of the 
word: 

va.'a ÔgoodÕ and va 'a Ônot goodÕ. Look at 
these other examples: 


xa.tu. 

spicy 

xŠtu. 

not spicy 

u.'vi. 

difficult 

Ÿ'vi. 

not difficult 

ve.e 

heavy 

v‘e 

not heavy 

kue.'e. 

fierce 

ku‘'e. 

not fierce 



x”ni. 

knows 

x•ni. 

doesnÕt know 

kžni. 

wants 

kškžni. 

doesnÕt want 

kžxi 

rusting 

kškžxi 

not rusting 

kœt—o 

likes 

kškœt—o 

doesnÕt like 




 33 

 


 
No todas las lengœas mixtecas se escriben 
igœal. En el pœeblo de Tiata'nœ, tambie n llamado 
Metlatonoc, en Gœerrero, se escriben diferente el 
mixteco. Ellos no ponen signos en mœchas vocales. 
Usan algœnos signos qœe nosotros no œsamos. Lee 
las sigœientes oraciones. 


Ka'vi n a. 


^Ka'vi n a. 


*Ka'vi n a. 



34 

 



^Ndaki'in n a ndivi. 


Tiaa ra. 


*Tiaa ra. 


^Tiaa ra. 


Ndaki'in 
n a ndivi. 


*Ndaki'in n a 
ndivi. 



 35 

 



Como ha observado con los ejemplos, los 
mixtecos de Tiata'nœ œsan dos signos qœe nosotros 
no œsamos para diferenciar entre acciones qœe no 
han empezado, qœe esta n en proceso, o qœe ya se 
han terminado. 

El acento circœnflejo, o copete (^), se 
escribe al principio de œna palabra para mostrar 
qœe algo esta en proceso. El asterisco, o estrellita 
(*), se escribe al principio de œna palabra para 
indicar œna accio n ya completa. 


Ndakava ra. 


^Ndakava ra. 


*Ndakava ra. 




